Add CEP for a URL field for package records (#151)
conda/ceps: cep-XXXX.md

## Motivation

Currently, the download location for a package is constructed by combining the `base_url` field (defined in [CEP 16](https://conda.org/learn/ceps/cep-0016)) with the package filename (which serves as the dictionary key in repodata). This has a couple of limitations:

1. Packages must be stored in the same directory
2. It is not possible to serve the files from different servers or Content Delivery Networks (CDNs)

## Rationale

Adding a `url` field enables several use cases that are not possible with the current approach:

- **Per-package directories**: Common in PyPI indexes where each package has its own subdirectory
- **CDN distribution**: Packages can be served from different CDNs with hash-based URLs
- **Mixed sources**: Different packages in the same repodata can be hosted on different servers
- **Backward compatibility**: Traditional flat directory structures continue to work by setting `url` to the filename

Although wheels were the primary motivation, this change provides general flexibility for package hosting in the conda ecosystem.

## Specification

> Package repodata records SHALL contain a `url` field, and the value SHALL be set to either an absolute or relative URL.

Reviewer: Wouldnt it be easier to _optionally_ add the url? And fallback to previous behavior if its not present?

# CEP XXXX - URL field for package records

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> URL field for package records</td></tr>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td>
  Dan Yeaw &lt;dyeaw@anaconda.com&gt;
</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Feb 2, 2026</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Feb 2, 2026</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/111 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> TBD </td></tr>

> <tr><td> Requires </td><td><a href="https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/135">conda/ceps#135</a> (CEP 36 — package metadata files served by conda channels)<br><a href="https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/146">conda/ceps#146</a> (backwards-compatible repodata update strategy)</td></tr>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<tr><td> Requires </td><td> <a href="https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/146">conda/ceps#146</a> (backwards-compatible repodata update strategy)</td></tr>
```

No need to annotate approved CEPs here. Also, if we require 146, that means they have to be voted together. Are we doing that? Or do you think this CEP can be voted separately?

</table>

> The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC2119][RFC2119] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

## Abstract

This CEP introduces a new optional `url` field in package records to specify download locations for individual packages.

## Motivation

Currently, the download location for a package is constructed by combining the `base_url` field (defined in [CEP 16](https://conda.org/learn/ceps/cep-0016)) with the package filename (which serves as the dictionary key in repodata). This has a couple of limitations:

> 1. Packages must be stored in the same directory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Packages must be stored in the same directory as `repodata.json`
```

2. It is not possible to serve the files from different servers or Content Delivery Networks (CDNs)

## Rationale

Adding a `url` field enables several use cases that are not possible with the current approach:

- **Per-package directories**: Common in [PyPI simple repositories](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/hosting-your-own-index/#manual-repository) where each package has its own subdirectory
- **CDN distribution**: Packages can be served from different CDNs with hash-based URLs
- **Mixed sources**: Different packages in the same repodata can be hosted on different servers
- **Backward compatibility**: Traditional flat directory structures continue to work by setting `url` to the filename

Although wheels were the primary motivation, this change provides general flexibility for package hosting in the conda ecosystem.

## Specification

> Package repodata records MAY contain a `url` field. When present, the value SHALL be set to either an absolute or relative URL.

Reviewer 2: Who's adding that `url` field? I assume it does NOT come from `info/index.json` files in records; instead it's added by the indexing tool because they are processing remote files, correct?

Author: Hi @jaimergp, thanks! I updated this to make it more clear that it is the index tool that adds the url.

> Package repodata records MAY contain a `url` field. When present, the value SHALL be set to either an absolute or relative URL.

Reviewer 2: What's a "relative URL"? Do you mean a "relative path"?
```suggestion
Package repodata records MAY contain a `url` field. When present, the value MUST be set to either a full URL or a relative POSIX path.
```

> Package repodata records MAY contain a `url` field. When present, the value SHALL be set to either an absolute or relative URL.

Reviewer 2: Can relative paths traverse parents with `../` or is that forbidden? If not, should we forbid that for security purposes?

Author: Hi @jaimergp, thanks for the feedback! I updated the CEP to exclude path traversal to parents. I think it isn't great for security and other methods of declaring base_urls are already flexible enough without it.

> Package repodata records MAY contain a `url` field. When present, the value SHALL be set to either an absolute or relative URL.

Reviewer 2: Are there any rules where the filename in the `url` field must match the filename in the repodata key? Should they? Which filename is it used for the local cache if they don't match?

Author: Thanks, I added language about the cache key needing to be the basename of the file. This will support both current files and future ones like wheels.

Conda clients SHALL construct the download URL as follows:

1. Determine the base URL:
   - If the repodata's `info` object contains a `base_url` field, use that value
   - Otherwise, use an empty string (`""`)

2. Determine the package path:
   - If the package record contains a `url` field, use that value
   - Otherwise, use the package filename (the dictionary key)

3. Resolve the download URL by combining the base URL with the package path following [RFC 3986 URL resolution semantics](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-5) (equivalent to Python's `urllib.parse.urljoin(base_url, package_path)`).

This resolution means:

> - **Absolute URLs**: If the package path is an absolute URL (e.g., `https://cdn.example.com/package.conda`), it is used as-is, ignoring the base URL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Full URLs**: If the package path is a full URL (e.g., `https://cdn.example.com/package.conda`), it is used as-is, ignoring the base URL
```

> - **Relative URLs with base_url**: If the package path is relative (e.g., `subdir/package.conda`) and `base_url` is set (e.g., `https://repo.example.com/`), the result is `https://repo.example.com/subdir/package.conda`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Relative path with `base_url`**: If the package path is relative (e.g., `subdir/package.conda`) and `base_url` is set (e.g., `https://repo.example.com/`), the result is `https://repo.example.com/subdir/package.conda`
```

> - **Relative URLs without base_url**: If the package path is relative and no `base_url` is specified, the package path remains relative and will be resolved by the HTTP client relative to the repodata's location

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Relative path without `base_url`**: If the package path is relative and no `base_url` is specified, the package path remains relative and will be resolved by the HTTP client relative to the repodata's location
```

## Examples

### Absolute URL

> In this example, the package is served from a CDN with an absolute URL:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the package is served from a CDN with a full URL:
```

```json
{
  "info": {
    "base_url": "https://repo.example.com/conda/linux-64/"
  },
  "packages.conda": {
    "packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda": {
      "build": "pyh29332c3_1",
      "build_number": 1,
      "depends": [
        "python >=3.8"
      ],
      "license": "Apache-2.0 OR BSD-2-Clause",
      "md5": "8da6e3f6a14a8f7b8e43f0e4b3e6b5c9",
      "name": "packaging",
      "noarch": "python",
      "sha256": "a1b2c3d4e5f6a7b8c9d0e1f2a3b4c5d6e7f8a9b0c1d2e3f4a5b6c7d8e9f0a1b2",
      "size": 51234,
      "subdir": "noarch",
      "timestamp": 1735689600000,
      "url": "packaging/packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda",
      "version": "25.0"
    }
  }
}
```

The client would resolve the relative `url` against the `base_url` to get: `https://repo.example.com/conda/linux-64/packaging/packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda`

## Backward Compatibility

This CEP introduces a new optional `url` field to package records. Since the field is optional, this change is backwards-compatible:

> - Older clients that don't recognize the `url` field will continue to construct download URLs using the existing method (combining `base_url` with the package filename)

Reviewer 2: Won't this mean that these old clients will get 404s for records that define `url`?

Author: We will use the backwards compatible repodata update strategy, I made this more clear in the CEP.

# CEP XXXX - URL field for package records

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> URL field for package records</td></tr>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td>
  Dan Yeaw &lt;dyeaw@anaconda.com&gt;
</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Feb 2, 2026</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Feb 2, 2026</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/111 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> TBD </td></tr>
<tr><td> Requires </td><td> <a href="https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/146">conda/ceps#146</a> (backwards-compatible repodata update strategy)</td></tr>
</table>

> The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC2119][RFC2119] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

## Abstract

This CEP introduces a new optional `url` field in package records to specify download locations for individual packages.

## Motivation

> Currently, the download location for a package is constructed by combining the `base_url` field (defined in [CEP 16](https://conda.org/learn/ceps/cep-0016)) with the package filename (which serves as the dictionary key in repodata). This has a couple of limitations:

Reviewer 3: `.info.base_url` as it appears in CEP 16 is actually defined in CEP 15.

> 1. Packages must be stored in the same directory as `repodata.json`

Reviewer 3: This claim is a little confusing; [CEP 15](https://conda.org/learn/ceps/cep-0015/) defines `base_url` for the explicit purpose of allowing `repodata.json` to live in a separate location than the packages artifacts. What CEP 15 does _not_ provide for each individual package artifact to live in a separate location, which is what this CEP seemingly wants to achieve.

2. It is not possible to serve the files from different servers or Content Delivery Networks (CDNs)

## Rationale

> Adding a `url` field enables several use cases that are not possible with the current approach:

Reviewer 3: Would replacing

> Adding a `url` field enables...

with:

> Adding an optional `url` field to individual package repodata records enables...

help make the motivation a bit clearer, especially with respect to the scope of the suggested changes?

- **Per-package directories**: Common in [PyPI simple repositories](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/hosting-your-own-index/#manual-repository) where each package has its own subdirectory
- **CDN distribution**: Packages can be served from different CDNs with hash-based URLs
- **Mixed sources**: Different packages in the same repodata can be hosted on different servers
- **Backward compatibility**: Traditional flat directory structures continue to work by setting `url` to the filename

> Although wheels were the primary motivation, this change provides general flexibility for package hosting in the conda ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: In particular, this CEP would allow people to construct their own channel by combining existing ones, beyond the flexibility provided by CEP 42.

## Specification

> Package repodata records MAY contain a `url` field. The `url` field is NOT part of the package's `info/index.json`. It is added by the index generation tool when building repodata. When present, the value MUST be set to either a full URL or a relative POSIX path. Relative paths MUST NOT contain `..` path components.

Reviewer 3: I'd consider replacing:

> relative POSIX path

with

> URI relative path, as defined in [RFC 3986](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3986/#section-3.3)

This better aligns with how other parts of this and other CEPs, particularly CEPs 15 and 26, describe how to locate package artifacts and avoids any potential confusion since other CEPs don't strictly require that conda package artifact hosting systems support POSIX filesystem semantics.

(Okay, those CEPs also do not strictly require that such hosting systems support any notion of a path hierarchy, so relative paths won't make sense in the first place, but from a practical perspective, that's not a problem I'm worried about.)

Conda clients SHALL construct the download URL as follows:

1. Determine the base URL:
   - If the repodata's `info` object contains a `base_url` field, use that value

>    - Otherwise, use an empty string (`""`)

Reviewer 3: I think this can be collapsed to:

> 1. Determine the base URL as described in [the "Specification" section of CEP 15](https://github.com/conda/ceps/blob/main/cep-0015.md#specification).

2. Determine the package path:
   - If the package record contains a `url` field, use that value
   - Otherwise, use the package filename (the dictionary key)

> 3. Resolve the download URL by combining the base URL with the package path following [RFC 3986 URL resolution semantics](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-5) (equivalent to Python's `urllib.parse.urljoin(base_url, package_path)`).

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering if this part can be simplified down to something like:

> 1. If the `url` field is an absolute URL, then its value MUST be accepted of the download URL of the package artifact.
> 2. If the `url` field is a relative URL, then the download URL of the package artifact MUST be constructed according to [CEP 15](https://github.com/conda/ceps/blob/main/cep-0015.md#specification), with the value of `url` used in place of "package filename" within that specification.

That way, we can ensure reasonably consistent behavior as to how `base_url` or its absence should be handled, especially if we ever make future adjustments to CEP 15.

Reviewer 3: As an aside, I would avoid using Python's `urllib.parse.urljoin(...)` as a reference for how to join URL components, as its behavior is (IMO, at least) a bit quirky:

```
>>> urllib.parse.urljoin('https://example.com/my-channel/linux-64', './mypkg-1.0-0.conda')
'https://example.com/my-channel/mypkg-1.0-0.conda'
```

4. Determine the local cache filename:

>    - The basename of the resolved download URL SHALL be used as the local cache filename.

Reviewer 3: What does `basename` mean in this context?

If it means the last part of the resolved download URL, that could be potentially problematic as it means two channels that serve packages with the same filename but different contents (e.g., `mypkg-4.0-0.conda`) would collide in the cache. Though, that's not a problem specific to this CEP.

This resolution means:

- **Full URLs**: If the package path is a full URL (e.g., `https://cdn.example.com/package.conda`), it is used as-is, ignoring the base URL
- **Relative path with `base_url`**: If the package path is relative (e.g., `subdir/package.conda`) and `base_url` is set (e.g., `https://repo.example.com/`), the result is `https://repo.example.com/subdir/package.conda`

> - **Relative path without `base_url`**: If the package path is relative and no `base_url` is specified, the package path remains relative and will be resolved by the HTTP client relative to the repodata's location

Reviewer 3: Can these two bullet point collapsed to "use the behavior described in CEP 15, replacing `package filename` with the relative path provided by the value of `url` "?

> - **Relative path without `base_url`**: If the package path is relative and no `base_url` is specified, the package path remains relative and will be resolved by the HTTP client relative to the repodata's location

Reviewer 3: Non-blocking stylistic note: while HTTP is by far the most common protocol used by conda and friends, it's generally not safe to assume that it's the _only_ protocol being used. (E.g., S3 and (S)FTP are definitely not out of the question.)

```json
{
  "info": {
    "base_url": "https://repo.example.com/conda/linux-64/"
  },
  "packages.conda": {
    "packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda": {
      "build": "pyh29332c3_1",
      "build_number": 1,
      "depends": [
        "python >=3.8"
      ],
      "license": "Apache-2.0 OR BSD-2-Clause",
      "md5": "8da6e3f6a14a8f7b8e43f0e4b3e6b5c9",
      "name": "packaging",
      "noarch": "python",
      "sha256": "a1b2c3d4e5f6a7b8c9d0e1f2a3b4c5d6e7f8a9b0c1d2e3f4a5b6c7d8e9f0a1b2",
      "size": 51234,
      "subdir": "noarch",
      "timestamp": 1735689600000,
      "url": "packaging/packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda",
      "version": "25.0"
    }
  }
}
```

The client would resolve the relative `url` against the `base_url` to get: `https://repo.example.com/conda/linux-64/packaging/packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda`

## Backward Compatibility

This CEP introduces a new optional `url` field to package records. Since the field is optional, this change is backwards-compatible:

- Newer clients will use the `url` field when present, falling back to the traditional method when absent
- Existing repodata without `url` fields will continue to work without modification

> However, older clients that don't recognize the `url` field will continue to construct download URLs using the existing method (combining `base_url` with the package filename). If a package is stored at a non-flat path (e.g., `packaging/packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda`) and the file does not also exist at the traditional flat path, older clients will receive a 404 error.

Reviewer 3: Consider replacing

> ...will receive a 404 error.

with

> ...might receive an HTTP 404 or other missing file error.

Though this does raise a (possibly minor) security concern, as in principle, a hostile package repository could supply a compromised package to an older client, and if it that client does not very the checksum of the downloaded artifact, ...

For example:

```text
https://conda.anaconda.org/my-channel/linux-64/numpy-2.4.2-py314hd4f4903_0.conda  ->  url: https://cdn.example.com/packages/numpy/numpy-2.4.2-py314hd4f4903_0.conda
https://conda.anaconda.org/my-channel/linux-64/numpy-2.4.2-py313hd4f4903_0.conda  ->  url: https://cdn.example.com/packages/numpy/numpy-2.4.2-py314hd4f4903_0.conda
```

The resolved `url` is therefore no longer a guaranteed unique identifier for a package record.

### Recommendation

Lockfile implementations SHOULD adopt Package URLs (PURLs), as defined in [conda/ceps#159](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/159) (draft), as the canonical unique identifier for package records. A conda PURL encodes a package's identity (channel, name, version, build string, and subdir) in a standardized, location-independent form, for example:

```text
pkg:conda/conda-forge/numpy@2.4.2?build=py314hd4f4903_0&subdir=linux-64
```

PURLs separate identity from location: two channels that independently index the same external CDN artifact will produce distinct PURLs. The resolved `url` field SHOULD be stored separately in the lockfile for fetching purposes.

## Security Considerations

> A package record's `url` field is authored by the channel. An attacker who can write to `repodata.json` can set an absolute `url` pointing to an attacker-controlled host and update the `md5`/`sha256` hashes to match. The client fetches the malicious artifact directly from that host, and could bypass any artifact proxy that the user may rely on for vulnerability scanning, egress control, and audit. Hash verification passes because the attacker controls both the artifact and the expected hashes.

Reviewer 3: Built into this threat model is the assumption that all conda-compatible clients perform checksum verification of the downloaded artifacts, which I'm 100% sure they all do (especially the older ones).

This attack requires only a write to `repodata.json`. In channel architectures where index generation and artifact storage use separate credentials or pipelines, such as a CI-driven indexing step backed by separate artifact storage, this represents a narrower attack surface than replacing an artifact directly.

Client implementations MUST expose a `url_policy` configuration option with the following values:

- `allow` (default): absolute and relative `url` values are resolved and fetched as specified.
- `relative_only`: absolute URLs in `url` fields are ignored; the client falls back to constructing the download URL from `base_url` and the package filename. RECOMMENDED for environments using artifact proxies or with egress restrictions.
- `disabled`: the `url` field is ignored entirely; behavior is equivalent to a client that does not implement this CEP.

Channel operators using absolute URLs for CDN distribution SHOULD document the set of external hosts used so that consumers can permit them in egress allow-lists.

## Rejected ideas

### Using the dictionary key for paths

> The directory path could be embedded in the package's dictionary key (e.g., `packaging/packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda`). While some clients may already support this, an explicit `url` field is clearer and maintains the convention that dictionary keys are filenames, not paths.

Reviewer 3: Also, [CEP 36's "Schema" section](https://github.com/conda/ceps/blob/main/cep-0036.md#schema) explicitly requires packages' key

> The directory path could be embedded in the package's dictionary key (e.g., `packaging/packaging-25.0-pyh29332c3_1.conda`). While some clients may already support this, an explicit `url` field is clearer and maintains the convention that dictionary keys are filenames, not paths.

Reviewer 3: A strict reading of CEP 36 entirely prohibits this as a possibility, as it explicitly requires the keys to be filenames.

For example:

```text
https://conda.anaconda.org/my-channel/linux-64/numpy-2.4.2-py314hd4f4903_0.conda  ->  url: https://cdn.example.com/packages/numpy/numpy-2.4.2-py314hd4f4903_0.conda
https://conda.anaconda.org/my-channel/linux-64/numpy-2.4.2-py313hd4f4903_0.conda  ->  url: https://cdn.example.com/packages/numpy/numpy-2.4.2-py314hd4f4903_0.conda
```

The resolved `url` is therefore no longer a guaranteed unique identifier for a package record.

### Recommendation

Lockfile implementations SHOULD adopt Package URLs (PURLs), as defined in [conda/ceps#159](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/159) (draft), as the canonical unique identifier for package records. A conda PURL encodes a package's identity (channel, name, version, build string, and subdir) in a standardized, location-independent form, for example:

```text

> pkg:conda/conda-forge/numpy@2.4.2?build=py314hd4f4903_0&subdir=linux-64

Reviewer: This is not quite enough because it doesnt include the full url of the channel itself. A lockfile can easily contain numpy from conda-forge but from different sources. I dont know what the canonical form for that is?

Reviewer 4: Agreed, and would argue that we should either stick to the "conda URL" or do something like:

`{conda_url}@{resolved_url}`

Otherwise, indirection via conda_url -> PackageRecord (in lockfile) -> URL sounds like it should work fine.

Reviewer 5: As I read conda/ceps#159, this should resolve to `https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/noarch/repodata.json`. There is a repodata in that place, assuming numpy resolves in there with the data provided, this should specify the package OK.

Reviewer: Yes but if the lockfile contains packages from `http://prefix.dev/conda-forge` and `http://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge` we need to be able to distinguish them.
